LA faces 'extreme fire danger' as high winds forecast 

Winds that have fanned wildfires in the US city of Los Angeles are again expected to kick up on Wednesday - after a 25th death from the huge, week-long outbreak was confirmed. 

Forecasters have again identified an area of "extreme fire danger", emphasising the risk level in a region to the north-west of the city centre. 

In some mountainous areas, it is possible for winds to reach speeds of 70mph (113km/h), which would be nearly hurricane-force if they are sustained. 

The anticipated increase in speeds threatens to spread the remaining four blazes, which firefighters have made further progress in tackling during a few days of calmer conditions. 

Wind speeds began a slow and steady climb on Wednesday morning in parts of Los Angeles and Ventura counties. They are expected to peak during the day on Wednesday, according to the National Weather Service (NWS). 

Compared with last week's conditions, winds are "weaker but still strong", the NWS cautions. 

There are hopes of another drop over the subsequent days - but officials have highlighted the need for rain that would help fire crews in their battle. 

"The anticipated winds combined with low humidities and low fuel moistures will keep the fire threat in the LA region critical," Los Angeles County Fire Chief Anthony Marrone said during a news conference on Tuesday. 

Areas to the north-west of Los Angeles - including Simi Valley and Thousand Oaks - have been deemed to be particularly dangerous. 

 

An improvement in conditions is forecast later on Thursday and into Friday, says BBC Weather forecaster Sarah Keith-Lucas. 

But no rainfall is forecast for at least the next week - and the Santa Ana winds that have been blamed for stoking the blazes could again develop from Sunday. 

The fire chief for the city of Pasadena echoed the need for precipitation. 

There had been no "real rain in southern California" for more than 250 days, Chad Augustin told BBC Radio 4's Today programme. 

His firefighters would spent Wednesday on "standing guard ready to ensure that we hold our containment lines and we don't burn up any more structures", Mr Augustin added. 

An extreme weather attribution study from climate scientists at 'Climameter' has concluded that the Californian wildfires have been fuelled by meteorological conditions strengthened by human-induced climate change. 

The study found that current conditions have been up to 41F (5C) warmer, 15% drier and 20% windier compared to the past, in the areas affected by the fires. 

 

The 25th death from the fires was confirmed by the LA County Medical Examiner's Office. Thirteen other people remain missing. 

Most of the victims have died in the Eaton Fire, which has burned more than 14,000 acres to the city's north, but has now been 35% contained by firefighters. 

Further west, the larger Palisades Fire has torched more than 23,000 acres, and is now at 18% containment. Two smaller fires also continue to burn. 

Some of the victims of the Eaton Fire have now been allowed to return to their homes, although officials say they have no firm date for repopulation of the Palisades area, an upmarket area ravaged by the fire to which it lent its name. 

Tens of thousands of people are therefore still under evacuation orders - where night-time curfews also apply - and thousands of homes have been destroyed in one of the costliest natural disasters in American history. 

On Tuesday, Los Angeles Mayor Karen Bass described the scenes as "unimaginable", vowing to exercise her executive powers to trigger rapid rebuilding efforts. 

Setting out other measures to help locals, another official, the LA County supervisor, said an emergency proclamation would be issued to prevent alleged price-gouging by LA landlords amid the crisis. 

 

 