UnitedHealth lacks antidote for chronic anger 

NEW YORK, Jan 15 (Reuters Breakingviews) - UnitedHealth (UNH.N), opens new tab Chief Executive Andrew Witty stated the obvious when he wrote, opens new tab last month that no one would design a healthcare system like the one in the United States. He neglected to detail how the medical goliath he runs helped create the “patchwork” structure and takes full advantage of it. With dissatisfaction among patients and politicians crystallizing following the murder of a senior UnitedHealth executive last month, the company finds itself in the improbable position of transforming from being a big part of the disease to contributing to the cure. 

Since it was started 50 years ago to process insurance claims for doctors in Minnesota, UnitedHealth has turned into a sprawling nationwide conglomerate worth some $500 billion. Instead of reducing costs for patients, the heft has mostly generated ever-increasing market power and profit. Only 44% of Americans surveyed, opens new tab in November rated healthcare quality as excellent or good, the lowest figure since Gallup started the annual poll in 2001. Seven out of 10 said the system is in crisis or has major problems. 

Wall Street is nevertheless optimistic about UnitedHealth’s prospects. A combination of providing more services to members, rising healthcare expenses, and the expansion of Medicare, the federal program for people 65 and older, all contribute to the bullishness. 

On the day the head of UnitedHealth’s insurance business, Brian Thompson, was shot last month, the company told investors the division he ran would grow nearly 10% annually, unregulated businesses were set to expand even faster and overall return on equity would be 20% or higher. Its shares have already returned more than 450% over the past decade, twice as much as the S&P 500 Index (.SPX), opens new tab. 

UnitedHealth's stock has outperformed the market as a whole over the past decade. 
 

The exuberance depends on U.S. healthcare policy staying largely unchanged, despite the shockingly callous reaction to Thompson’s death. How UnitedHealth intends to grow may nevertheless harden displeasure in Washington and beyond and spur some overdue changes. The United States, for example, spends, opens new tab more than twice as much on healthcare as any of its 37 peer nations in the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development. 