Biden's late moves on China, Russia, AI may mostly boost Trump 

WASHINGTON, Jan 15 (Reuters) - With just days to go in his presidency, U.S. President Joe Biden is releasing a flurry of new measures that challenge China's chip-making and shipbuilding and limit Russian oil, while a ceasefire in Gaza is said to be in reach after months of failed talks. 

The Biden administration is clearing the decks before Republican Donald Trump is inaugurated on Jan. 20, wrapping up probes and issuing new policy. In many cases, analysts and officials say, these moves will benefit the incoming Trump administration, giving it new negotiating tools against China, Russia and others. 

In less than a week, the Biden White House has sanctioned Russian oil producers and ships, restricted semiconductor chip exports, found Chinese shipbuilding practices unfair, ceded federal land for AI centers and cemented plans to effectively bar Chinese vehicles. 

With his last-minute announcements, Biden is "trying to shape how history will remember him," said Robert Rowland, a University of Kansas professor who specializes in presidential rhetoric. In doing so, "he's giving Trump a lot of leverage," he said, adding that Biden may not be helping himself. 

If Biden wanted to burnish his legacy, he "should have been doing these things a year ago. It’s too late now," Rowland added. Biden will deliver a farewell speech from the Oval Office Wednesday evening. 

The Biden team is teeing up some nearly final measures that Trump could use to fulfill campaign promises that helped Republicans best Democrats in every battleground state in the U.S. election, political strategists said. 

The Biden administration's investigation into Chinese shipbuilding, for example, recently concluded that Beijing used financial support, forced technology transfers and intellectual property theft to unfairly disadvantage U.S. shipbuilders, sources told Reuters. 

Conducted under Section 301 of the U.S. Trade Act, the probe's findings allow Biden to take credit for holding Beijing accountable, while creating a legal pathway for Trump to make good his promise of raising tariffs on China. 

 

 